testing one two three one two three one two three one two three this is thursday april 11 i believe and we're in the evans library and i have the pleasure and honor of recording the memories of jorge barrera b-a-r-r-e-r-a who is president of the resident hall association
and about to finish his term is that right yeah Jorge introduce yourself to anyone who might hear this machine or later of course we want to type these up we'll give you a copy to read and review and correct our typing errors uh introduce yourself to someone who might listen or read tell us about your background your family and all you did before you came to A&M all right howdy
My name is Jorge Barrera.
I'm a senior electrical engineering major from Eagle Pass, Texas.
I was born in Piedras Negras, Coahuila.
Probably remember the Texas Aggie class of 2001.
I was born in Piedras and I spent some time there because my dad's family is in Piedras.
My mom's family is in Eagle Pass and when I was born we stayed a few months with my grandmother and then we came back to Eagle Pass.
My dad worked at that time at a furniture store and my mom at a downtown store.
And I have another brother.
His name is Luis Armando Barrera.
He's 15 or 16 right now.
Wait, say his first name slower.
Luis.
Armando.
Yes.
And he was born in Piedras.
When I was born, my uncle was a doctor there.
So he was kind of overlooking when I was born.
And my aunt was a doctor there, so she overlooked my brother.
And most of my childhood I would spend with my grandparents in Piedras.
I spent so much time with my grandmother and my uncles.
Every single weekend that I had, every spring break, every summer, I would spend there with her.
She was kind of like my mother.
So you grew up bilingual, truly bilingual?
At first, for about the first six, seven years, I just spoke Spanish.
And I kind of taught myself how to speak English, you know, watching a lot of TV and, you know, commercials and billboards and everything else.
I just started learning English.
And you're going to, when you start school, where do you, first grade?
Eagle Pass, on the American side.
Right, you're living on the, in Eagle Pass all that time, okay.
And by then, by that time I had kind of already learned a little bit, most of it, and then the rest I just learned throughout school.
And I went to the school, this elementary, San Luis Elementary.
It was pretty fun.
How big was Eagle Pass in those days when you were in elementary school?
15, 20,000 people.
And Piedras was?
A lot bigger.
Two or three times that?
I would say so.
It's a lot bigger city.
And did you travel much as a youngster beyond that area?
Actually, if we didn't go to, let's say, fishing or just some ranches that my uncles had, we'd go to see my uncles in Monterrey.
Mexico and it'll it always be my dad and my grandma because we had just spent so much time together all three of us and so much with my grandmother and that's pretty much the only place that we'd ever go and we'd go to all the other parks and with my uncles and zoos and everything in multiple ways it was pretty fun i had a pretty good childhood as you look back uh who were the positive uh
family that had a good positive effect on you and your learning and most of it was my parents of course because they gave me all the values and anything that i needed to learn but most of all my grandma like she helped me a lot and just because i spent so much time there in her house and my uncles as well by the time you're at high school how many in your senior class that you'll pass
Well, I graduated with 660-something, which was the biggest high school class.
That was the record.
Yeah.
Break it down, Hispanic, Anglo.
Just to guess, I would say about 90% Hispanic, and the rest is Anglo.
There's some people from Asia.
Well, there were.
India.
I can't remember a single African-American family.
I think there's about two or three now, but when I was there, I just can't remember a single one.
When did you get the idea of going to college?
I've been wanting to go to college since probably fifth, sixth grade, and there's an interesting story of how I wanted to come here to A&M.
When I was a fifth grader,
I was a big Longhorn fan because it was the first team I had ever seen or the first school.
So I would always do that hook'em thing and all that stuff.
And then one year, I was in sixth grade by that time, I was at my grandmother's and it was Thanksgiving night.
Yeah, it was Thursday night.
And I was watching this game, because I knew the Longhorns were going to play that game.
And out of the tunnel, I see this team coming out in this maroon helmet.
And it's got these three letters.
It's got a T, an A, and an M. And it kind of surprised me to see that team.
And I started looking more into that team.
So by seventh grade, I had become a big Aggie fan.
That was because I saw a helmet.
And I don't know why, it just appealed to me that helmet did.
So that year, when I was in seventh grade, because over there it's first through sixth is elementary, seventh through ninth is junior high, and then 10th through 12th is high school.
I was talking to this one friend of mine and I said hey let's go to A&M because he had sisters that had come here and I said playing I said jokingly I said hey let's become roommates now this is your eighth grade seventh grade seventh grade funny thing our senior year I talked to him again and I said are we going up there and he's like yeah and I said are we going to be roommates he said yes and we ended up being roommates for four years he graduated this past year oh god
and you went to Houston, and it was a pretty good, it was like a brotherhood more than anything.
Did, nobody in my family had ever finished high school until I did, let alone go to college.
Were there any college graduates ahead of you in your family?
There was no college, well, on the side of my dad, they're all doctors, but they all went to Mexico.
On this side, most of my
mom's brothers and sisters on the American side and they finished high school but none of them went to college one went to a community college McLennan I think in Waco but he was there for a little while he played semi-professional baseball and then he became a minister so were there some teachers in high school that you now realize were also very important in your dreams and
I've been thinking about it for a while now, and I really can't think of any.
Like I've been trying to see if anybody really pushed me or anything, but just...
When you applied for admission to A&M, had you come to visit?
Had you been here?
by them I've been here once before when I was a freshman but it was it was this thing that I was in the honor society and we had these two teachers I think one of them had been a student here that had this trip planned for us we came over and
We went to some class and I really don't remember much about it.
I remember coming but I don't remember much about the school.
Did it make a positive impression or much of any impression on you?
No, not at all.
I mean by that time I knew I wanted to come here.
Okay.
I guess I was thinking about some other stuff that I really didn't get to enjoy like I thought I would, like that visit, but I knew I still wanted to come here.
Right, so you apply for admission and you're admitted and you enrolled in the fall of 1997.
Were there any restrictions on your enrollment or anything?
Not on my enrollment, but ever since I wanted to come here I knew I wanted to become an electrical engineering major.
That semester I came in and I had to take this test and I was put in pre-engineering, general studies pre-engineering.
So I had to kind of work my way up to the engineering department.
I remember the first semester I
I took this classes and I remember getting a D in one of my classes.
And I started worrying about what if I didn't get accepted into it.
But after that all my grades started going up, up, up.
I guess they saw that I was improving, so they allowed me to become an electrical engineer.
When you came to enroll, did you go to fish camp?
No.
And there's another interesting story.
When I first came up was for orientation.
And it was funny because I came up with that guy, my friend, that we were going to become roommates.
His sister dropped us off in one of the gas stations because we were going to stay with a friend, this guy that I knew.
So we were there at the gas station for about 30 minutes not knowing where we were or anything.
He knew a little bit because two of his sisters had been here.
So he picked us up and then he would drop us off in school and just leave because he had other stuff to do.
And this campus was so big when I first came in that I had no idea where I was.
And some friends were here too on orientation.
And one of the things that happened was we all got separated to go into our college meetings.
And somehow I was walking around not knowing where I was.
I don't know how I ended up in G. Raleigh White.
I remember getting out of that building, looking around, and I saw all my friends walking together.
I was like, oh, there they are.
So we got back together.
But I have to say, this was a really big campus.
And my planning when I was going to come, I said, I'm going to look at the map and go around streets so I can know where I'm going.
But once I got here, I was like, I'm just going to walk across and see where I end up.
All right.
When you came to Enroll in the fall of 97, how did you get here?
Who brought you?
And what all of the, what kind of, what was the stuff that you brought with you?
All right.
That's a good story.
I came with my roommate because he had his truck.
And that was funny because that was a truck that
We need so much gas.
Pickup?
Yeah, pickup truck.
I think it was a Chevy.
And since I was living in Walton at the time, not in air condition, I remember most of the stuff we had were fans, clothes, and just a lot of stuff.
Because as a freshman, you bring in a lot of stuff, not knowing what you really need or anything like that.
And the first thing I remember, we parked, and we were taking down the fans.
And somebody from Schumacher yells, what do you guys need fans for?
And we said.
because we were living in Walton, they started laughing at us.
So I was like, hmm, that's pretty interesting.
I put my stuff up, and then, and this is one of the most vivid things I remember.
I'm walking down and going outside, and I meet this guy who's taking couches outside, introduces himself, he says, hey, they call me Rocky, and he's got a black eye.
And I was like, why do they call you Rocky?
He says, I get in a lot of fights.
And I started laughing, and he's like, and this is,
And this started a lot of the stuff, because you really know you're at the right place, he says.
Come and meet the guys outside.
So we go.
We turn around.
We turn the corner.
And outside are all these guys, a lot of them freshmen, just getting to know each other.
And he says, introduce yourself.
Go meet people around here.
So I sit down, and I start talking to a bunch of people.
I start the Aggie Network right there and then, and I think it's really fun.
Now one of the things that I particularly want to capture in this are your feelings regarding how you were treated as a Hispanic.
Did that first day, did anybody give you any plus or minus?
because of your background?
Not really.
I could have, I could kind of see it because at one point they're all, a big thing with Walton is they start giving out nicknames to the freshmen and I remember one of them they couldn't say his name was Adolfo and they couldn't say Adolfo they just say Adolf.
So his nickname became Hitler and but I sat down and I mean you're just a freshman you really don't know what's going on and
there's upperclassmen they think they know a lot more than you do and I mean they do know a lot more but I didn't really I saw that hey this is a freshman but I didn't see hey this is an Hispanic guy did you get a nickname no they had enough they had a hard time enough saying Jorge for a while so they just said I will just leave it with that oh now you and your roommate were there other Hispanics in the dorm at that point at that point yes
and I remember one of them who was a sophomore and he had become kind of a big person there because in Walton back then you were a bonfire, you were accepted and his name was Cito and I remember he was a pretty good guy and the other freshmen were like I said Adolfo and there's some other ones that hanged out with them and that's one of the most important things once you're hanging out with them you're accepted I mean it doesn't matter what happens or anything like that
so you move in describe uh that fall describe your room what did you all have there yeah I went in and there was nothing there was just two beds bunk beds my roommate that summer had been in Kingsville in a room and he's he looked at he's like I hate this place already and I was like wow
And I looked around and I was like, this is where I'm going to be for the next, what, four years or so?
And I said, wow, it's kind of just plain, really plain.
And it was really hot.
But after a while, I mean, you get so used to it.
And one of the, I remember that night was very funny because we were just, we were just taking a, or not a nap, just resting because we had to move all our stuff up.
And back then, those days,
So much storm rivalry.
And next door was a Schumacher.
Can I say bad words here?
I remember we were looking outside.
We were next to the window because we only had one window.
And I hear the guys from next door say, hey, Walton, fuck you.
And I got up and I was like, wow, there must be something going on.
So I went across the room to where the other guys, one was a sophomore and the other one was a freshman too.
But there was another sophomore in there and I said, hey, those guys are yelling at us.
Does that mean something?
And I was really excited and they just looked at me and they were like, oh, okay.
Because they knew what was going on.
I mean, they knew they'd do that every single night.
So I was like, okay.
So I went back to my room and unpacked some more.
All right, now in that room, when you all got it all set up, did you, you didn't have a computer?
No.
I didn't have a computer.
Did you have a television?
I decided that semester not to bring a television because I wanted to study.
And I, because I know myself, and I know that once I started watching television, it would distract me, and I said, no television.
You brought a radio.
And that was about it.
How much clothing did you bring?
More than enough.
More than enough?
Yeah.
You brought, did you bring suits?
No, just the usual like shirts and some nice stuff to, if I did go out.
Because one of my biggest hobbies or one thing that I really like to do is go out and meet people.
It's like a must.
Like every day I must meet at least one person.
Because I don't believe if you're in a college like this, this big, first of all, this friendly, not to meet people.
Good idea.
You meet people every single day.
Now how did you get enrolled in your classes that fall?
Was that done by mail?
Orientation.
Orientation, okay.
They were just there and they started picking out classes, like for freshmen, like English.
And engineering was your goal?
Yes.
And I was already being in engineering because I had a pre-calculus and I had engineering 189 and engineering, I don't remember what else.
And in your high school class, you were in what quart, what?
I was number five out of 600 and 70 or something.
So you had good, you had good grade, good scores.
Yeah, I had above 100.
I had a 101 point something.
Great, great.
And how many hours?
Do you remember how many hours that first fall?
Twelve.
And in order to get out of pre-engineering, what did you need to do?
I needed to get a
I think a 2.7 overall, and started taking those engineering courses.
I remember I got to a 2.5 something, but I went from a 2.1 my first semester, and the second semester I got a 2.8 and then a 3.0 and a 3.3, and they finally admitted me into engineering.
During that first semester,
Describe a typical class day.
What time did you get up?
What did you do at what time?
I think I had an 8 o'clock, so I woke up at 7 most of the time.
And I'd go to class, and some of those classes were really big.
Did you eat breakfast before you went?
That actually is, that semester I decided to get 21 meals, which was three meals a day.
So I'd get up, I'd go to breakfast.
And in Sevesa?
In Sevesa.
go to breakfast in Sabeasa, go to classes, go to lunch in Sabeasa, go to classes or whatever I had to do, come back and go to dinner with Walton in Sabeasa.
And so you all ate as a group at supper?
Yeah.
Pretty good.
That was a lot of fun.
And where did you study during the day?
What did you do when you didn't have anything scheduled, if you had say a couple hours?
Did you do it in your room?
I tried to do a lot in my room and I think I did some here at Evans.
I remember the first two years I studied a lot here.
And did you have anybody you turned to for advice?
There were these two guys that were sophomores.
So anytime we needed something, we kind of turned to them or I turned to my roommate.
He wasn't, he was still a freshman like I was, but those two guys had been here at least a year.
Once I started to know more people around the hall, around Walton, I would turn to them and say, hey, this and that, and they were pretty good at it.
If you wanted to take a nap,
Did you do that in your room?
Yeah, in my room, definitely.
Could you sleep in the afternoons without somebody bothering you?
Yeah.
It was kind of hot.
That was the only thing.
Actually, if it was in the room, we did it in the lounge, because that was the only place that had air conditioner.
So we'd just go in there, lie down for a few minutes, watch TV, because we didn't have a TV that first semester.
So not only did we have air conditioning, we had TV there.
So we spent some time there, too.
And then normally at night, you'd study till what time?
that first year I would say eleven twelve because it was we were trying to adapt alright and looking back now how well prepared did Eagle Pass High School not at all I wasn't prepared when I came in what what looking back on it what did you need more of more math definitely more math more physics and just more study skills when I got here
It was more like a, well, I was so high up there.
I know I can do it here.
When you get here, it's a reality.
You're not as smart as you thought.
It's not Eagle Pass where everybody's just below you.
Now you're at the average.
You have to work.
And when I got here, I learned that the hard way.
Did you go to class regularly?
Yeah.
I never skipped or anything.
And as far as you can recall, about how much did that first year cost?
I would say about three grand.
Did your family?
I had grants and loans and whatever my family could help me out with.
So you didn't have to work?
No, I didn't have to work.
Then as football season began, describe a freshman going to his first Aggie football games.
Well, the first thing I actually did was I'll unite.
when all the halls get together as a hall and they lock arms and people are trying to take your flag.
That to me was amazing because it was something that I'd never seen.
People were trying to get our flags and we really got rowdy.
At those times, things were really rowdy.
I mean, there were so many fights and stuff would just go on and you'd get there and the grogels that they had and it was just, everything was just new to me.
So we all went together as a group, and we did so much stuff, and that's when we started bonding, what we'd call our fish buddies.
So I started to get to know a lot of the guys there, and it was fun.
I mean, I was sweating, and it was just so much fun.
And once football started coming around, of course, it was Midnight Yale practice first, and that was a lot of fun.
That was something really new.
that was real pride and that was real school spirit, not the, you know, cheerleading and all that stuff.
To me, that's very useless.
And then when you went to the game, did you and a bunch of your dormitory buddies go together?
Yeah, we had, we went together as a whole because we pulled together and it was just a great experience.
It's just the game itself, everybody standing up.
I remember, because I wore boots all the time, I remember taking boots
And by the end of the day, my feet were hurting.
And I remember saying, never again will I bring boots.
I mean, I still wore them.
But after that day out, I said, until a football game that you have to stand up all the time.
I'm going to bring something more comfortable.
All right.
And that first fall, what did you and your buddies do on a Saturday night after the game?
We'd either go to either dorm parties or.
Where would that be?
Different houses.
And just across the street, there was this one place.
I can't remember the name of it.
But I remember we would follow them there, and we'd go to that.
Off campus?
Yeah.
And we would just be there hanging out with friends that were here.
We had some girlfriends that had come over here, and we'd just hang out together.
Kind of got to know everybody, and it was just, I can't really don't, that's a good question.
All right, then on Sunday, what time did you wake up?
For our football weekend, what time would a freshman wake up on Sunday?
I've always woke up kind of early.
So I would wake up to watch either cartoons or just to wake up or study or it's been so long.
Now did you go to church?
Not here.
All right.
Then Sunday afternoon, study or goof off?
Study and a lot of goofing off too.
It was one of those days that you just want to be in your room and just.
And you didn't go to any of the out of town football games?
No.
All right.
Then did you go home that fall before Thanksgiving?
I would say I went at least home twice.
I don't really remember, but I think I did go home twice.
And you all, how long a drive is it to Eagle Pass?
Five and a half.
And you'd go in that pickup truck?
Yeah.
Did you take anybody else with you or just the two?
It'd be most of us, just the two of us.
Mostly just the two of us.
Once in a while we would take an extra person.
Leave Friday what time?
Noon?
Noon one.
And get back Sunday?
Like at five, six.
I try to leave as soon as possible in traffic and all that stuff.
The, and you learned about the campus from dormitory friends.
A lot of it I learned from that.
That's why, in my experience, I don't really think fish camp is that big of a deal.
It's, the way I see it now, I think Fish Camp has lost a lot of its true meaning or what it really is made for.
I see a lot of these counselors going around campus, as we speak right now, doing all these goofy things, dressing up, that to me it seems more they're doing it for themselves and for a social purpose than what it was intended to be, was to bring in those freshmen and show them what it is A&M is all about.
How did you and your buddies learn about A&M traditions and all that?
Walton Hall.
Oh, okay.
It was all Walton.
Okay.
Did, let's see, did Walton have a nickname?
Were you all the Walton?
Loads.
Loads?
L-O-A-D-S, because during bonfire, Walton was the one that would load the trees into them.
Oh, okay.
So that became a big, they're the warriors, but they're no more as loads.
The, and you didn't call your roommate your fish old lady.
No.
Did y'all use, in the dining hall, did y'all use Aggie slang for the food?
Not so much for the food, but a lot of the stuff that we did in there.
Such as?
For example, not so much words, but when Walton went in there during dinner, all the tables were, per se, horizontal.
Ours was the only one that was vertical.
And everybody knew that was Walton's table.
So we sat there, we did all these things.
We had some piece of balls, which are a bunch of napkins.
You put them together like a little ball and you start throwing them around.
And we'd yell at people.
We'd get on the tables.
During Friday, when there were home games, we would get up there and do Viking Yell.
which is when everybody starts eating without utensils or anything.
It's just very messy.
Then we have a yell.
All the halls would get on top of the tables and start yelling.
And of course, we did so much groating back then.
For people that don't know what groating is, it was just wrestling in the mud or wrestling in the dirt, just wrestling anywhere.
And you would see so many people running around campus groating each other.
You had what you call groat clothes, your groats, which was the same clothes you would wear throughout bonfire and everything like that.
You would get them dirty and that's how you left them.
You wore them like that.
They'd stink all the time and they were dirty all the time, muddy.
But that's what people were used to.
I would wake up on Saturday mornings, look outside the window and I would see people running all over campus, groaning already, like it had already started.
So I would go downstairs and I'd see the girls grow the guys and so on and so forth.
It was just so much fun.
Was there, as you think about the meaning of the word hazing, was there any hazing of freshman, your freshman year?
There probably was.
It was just very different.
Nobody ever paddled anybody, did they?
I never saw that.
And nobody forced you all to drink anything?
No.
There was one thing that was called Freshman, I can't remember the name.
In Sabeasa they had this plate and they put in all this food together.
And it's just the tradition that the freshmen have to eat a little bit of it.
And it was just fun.
It was just funny.
I never saw that as hazing.
And by and large, were the sophomore juniors and seniors helpful to you all?
Yeah, they were very nice.
A lot of, well, just like everything else, there were some that were extremely nice, some that just didn't care.
But I think about it now, and throughout the years, there's always been those people that have been really helpful.
And the other day, I was walking around, and I thought to myself that I should make a list of all those people that I've met.
Because the older you get, the more people start leaving, coming and leaving.
Sure, sure.
And as you went to class, as you look back on it, did you have good teachers that first semester?
Did you have some people?
There was one that I really didn't like.
Did not?
He was my English teacher.
What was wrong?
He just gave me D's.
Well, but did you deserve a D?
Looking at it now, probably yes.
But I really didn't like him at all.
Did he not encourage you?
What didn't you like about him?
I guess it was just the fact that he gave me that D. Like, I just didn't like him, period.
Like, I never thought about anything, but I just didn't like the guy for some reason.
What about on the positive side?
Were they, did you like, were the others good teachers?
Yeah, I realized that some of them really wanted to help you.
They weren't, because every year, or every time you hear people say, in college it's just a number, or
How big were your freshman sections?
It would depend.
If it was like a 105 class, we had at least 50 people.
That English class had like 20 or 30.
So it would all depend.
Some of them, like the chemistry and physics, they were just so huge.
Sort of like the weed out classes.
as far as you know except for that english uh did you normally get the grade you deserved yeah i would say so some of them was just surprising because like i said i had in high school i was all a's and i get here and i get some b's c's and i was just surprised how much i was going to have to study now you all didn't have a quick old quiz file did you in walton
I don't remember it.
I think they did, but I don't remember it.
Because they do now.
And I remember we've had a bunch of tests and quizzes and stuff like that there.
Do you remember going to your first Silver Taps?
Yes.
What was your impression?
I remember, because in Walton we talk about traditions all the time.
And we really encourage people to come out and join it.
And they would come around.
with kind of what you would call a wake-up.
They'd come and knock on your door and say, hey, come out to Silvertaps with us.
And I remember I was like, Silvertaps, what's that?
And they just explained what it was, and I was like, oh, wow.
And I remember going out there and seeing all those Aggies out there, and I was like, this is really nice.
I didn't think there was another school that could match us or be like us.
And that first Silvertaps.